---
layout:     post
title:      Intro to TCP/IP networking.
date:       2016-12-12 11:21:29
summary:    An introduction to the very basics of TCP/IP networking.
categories: networking
published:  true
---

# Networking fundamentals

## Intro to TCP/IP Networking Model
TCP stands for *Transport Control Protocol Internet Protocol*. Computer networking revolves around a sphere of strict protocols and that allow computers to communicate with each other. To understand how TCP/IP works in detail a little better we break TCP/IP into separate functioning layers that each have there own protocols. So let's take a look at each layer in the TCP/IP networking model.

## TCP/IP

* Application Layer
* Transport Layer
* Network Layer
* Physical Layer

## Application layer

The **application** layer is at the top of the model. All things happening in the application layer are related to sending and receiving data via an interface between software and computer. For example you open a web browser and search for **www.example.com**. As soon as you open the web browser you begin by using the application layer, within the application layer you have the following protocols **HTTP**, **POP3**, **SMTP** , **Web Server** etc.  

### Transport layer

The **transport** layer has two main protocols, **TCP and UDP**.

**TCP** stands for Transmission control protocol and **UDP** stands for User Diagram Protocol.

What dose the transport layer do with TCP and UDP?

In short the transport layer provides services to the higher layer above it which is the application layer. To really understand the transport layer you need to think of it as interacting with the application layer on a constant bases. How do they interact? Back in the application layer I explained how the user searched for www.example.com. Now imagine what might happen if for example the user searched for www.example.com and the HTTP GET request got lost and you received a error message in the browser. How dose the browser achieve the error message? TCP has a way of guaranteeing data delivery through error recovery. TCP uses sequence (SEQ) numbers and acknowledgments (ACK) to see if data is coming through or not and will notify the application if there was a error.

## Same layer and Adjacent Layer interaction

### Adjacent layer interaction
How layers next to each other on the **same computer** interact with each other and work together.

### Same layer interaction
Same layer on one computer wants to communicate with the same layer on **another computer**.

## Network layer

The network layer has a small number of protocols. The most important of them is **Internet Protocol**.

IP Provides two important features
* Addressing
* Routing

The network's main function is to tell the data where it's being transported to over the Internet. Thinking of the network as the the postal service is a good way to think of how a network works.

You sell two separate items on ebay. Each buyer is in a different location, when you send the packages to each of the buyers you don't think much about how the post office is going to process the packages. As for the post office they think about processing each package separately for every single package sent.

Say the first package is going to another town in your state and the second package that is going across the country. The post office chooses the best route for your package and transports it through it's many routes. Routes are different for each package for example, one route may require planes and trucks. Another route might require just trucks and different postal sites. The main function of the post office must be able to receive and fwd packages and make good choices about where to send each package next.

The person sending the package expects the postal service to deliver the package on time but dose not know all the details required to send the package from point a to b. The post office dose not know the details of the letter but it accepts the package.

TCP/IP *application and transport layers* are just like the (person) sending the package. To send the package the upper layers ask the layers underneath such as *network layer* (post office) to deliver the message.  

IP makes sure that each host computer has a different address just as the post office makes sure everyone has a unique address to deliver to.

### Addressing and Routing basics
Addresses are extremely important when it comes to sending data from device to device. Each device has a **host** and that host needs to have a unique address so it can be found in the network. Addresses are written in DDN dotted decimal notation.

Forwarding IP packets from one device to another happens through the TCP/IP network.

Basic routing is when routers route packets onward to a destination. For example my IP process wants to send my packet to a nearby router on the same local area network. The router receives the packet and it makes a logical choice. It takes a look at the destination address and compares it to it's known routes, which tells our router that it knows where to send the packet onto next. **This is called simple routing.**

Our router decides to send of the packet to another router that uses the same logic from our router and sends packet onward to it's destination.

## Link Layer Data Link + Physical
The data link layer refers to the hardware required to deliver data across the network. The term link refers to physical connections between two devices. The link layer also provides services to layers above it. When a router chooses to send a packet to another router or host the router that is sending the packet will use the data link layer details to send the packet onward it it's rightful destination.

Link layer protocols are used to deliver packets from place to place. A Ethernet frame is the encapsulated data between an Ethernet header and trailer. I'll talk more about this coming up.

The link layer has a large number of protocols which includes all variations of Ethernet protocols, LAN standards, WAN standards and PPP (point to point)

The main thing to think about when it comes to the data link layer is the **physical transmission of data and the rules that control the physical media**

## Data Encapsulation
Each layer in the TCP/IP model adds their own header and trailer to the data that is supplied by the higher level in the model. The term **Encapsulation** is a reference to putting **headers and trailers around data**. The process of encapsulation happens as follows.

I search for a website then encapsulate the contents of that web page inside a HTTP header. The **transport layer** then encapsulates the data inside a **TCP header** . From the transport layer we then move down to the **network layer** where IP *(Internet protocol)* encapsulates the TCP headers inside a **IP Header**. Lastly on the **data link layer** the we encapsulate the data supplied by the network layer.

The term *encapsulation* is referred to as the placement of data from a higher layer protocol behind the header of the next lower layer protocol.

## TCP/IP Messages
**Segment, Packet and Frame** each refer to the headers and possibly trailers of a certain layer and the data following that layer.

**Segment = Transport Layer**

**Packet = Network Layer**

**Frame = Data link Layer**

* Segment refers to a TCP header from the **transport layer** and it's encapsulated data.  

* Packet refers to logical grouping of bytes from the **network layer** header and encapsulated data. The network layer dose not include a header and trailer.

* Frame refers to the **data link layer (physical)** header, trailer and encapsulated data.

The OSI model is the standard to referencing network functions and layers. The OSI model is what TCP/IP is based on. To reference a layer in the networking model we use the OSI model. We reference a layer by name and number to define the area of the networking model we are talking about. For example, layer 1 application layer.

### OSI Networking Model

The OSI model has 7 layers.

Layer  |  Description
-----  | ------  
7 | **Application layer** provides an interface from the application to network by supplying a protocol with functions that are meaningful to the application.
6 | **Presentation layer** negotiates data formats such as JPEG, and ASCII text.
5 | **Session layer** groups multiple bidirectional messages into a work flow for simple management proposes.
4 | **Transport layer** performs data delivery between two end point hosts.
3 | **Network layer** defines logical addressing, routing and routing protocols used to learn routes.
2 | **Data link** defines protocols for delivering data over a single type of physical network.
1 | **Physical layer** defines the physical transmission of data through hardware.

### Device and protocol examples

Layer | Protocols and Specifications | Devices
----- | ---------------------------- | -------
**Application, Presentation, Session** | Telnet, HTTP, FTP, SMTP, POP3, VoIP, SNMP | Hosts, Firewalls
**Transport** | TCP, UDP | Hosts, Firewalls
**Network** | IP | Router
**Data link** | Ethernet, HDLC | LAN Switch, Wireless Access Point, Cable Modem, DSL Model.
**Physical** | RJ-45, Ethernet | LAN Hub, LAN repeater, cables

A good way to remember the OSI model is to use this phrase
### Please Do Not Take Sausage Pizza Away
Physical, Data Link, Network, Transport, Session, Presentation, Application

## Benefits of using OSI
* Less complex
* Standard interfaces
* Easier to learn
* Easier to develop
* Meeting same networking standards
* Modular Engineering

## Encapsulation Terminology
Each layer in the OSI model uses services from the next lower layer in the stack. *The lower layer **encapsulates** the higher layers data behind the header.* This is called a PDU (Protocol data unit). A PDU refers to the headers, trailers and encapsulated data of a layer that processes data. A IP Packet is considered a L3PDU (layer 3 protocol data unit). This happens throughout all layers in the OSI model.


## Important terms to memorize
* **Same layer interaction:** *communication between two networking devices at a same layer of a networking model.*

* **Adjacent layer interaction:**
*On a single computer two adjacent layers work together with the lower layer providing services to the higher layer.*  

* **de-encapsulation:** *Computer receives data over a network. The device (router) interprets lower layer headers and when finished, removes header revealing next higher layer PDU*

* **Encapsulation:** *Placement of data from higher layer behind the header (and in some cases between header and trailer) of next lower layer protocol*

* **Frame:** **data link** header, trailer data encapsulated between header and trailer *

* **Segment:** *Describes a header and its encapsulated data (L3PDU) The process of accpeting a large chunk of data from the application layer and breaking it into smaller pieces*

* **Packet:** *Logical grouping  of bytes that includes the **network layer header and encapsulated data** dose not include headers and trailers below network layer.

* **PDU:** *Referring to the header defined by some layer of networking model and the data encapsulated by the header. Not including any lower-layer headers and trailers*

**Stay Tuned** for more many more posts on Networking.
